docs(ESM): add ESM guide (#11344)
web-infra-dev/rspack: website/docs/en/guide/features/esm.mdx

import { Stability } from '@components/ApiMeta';

# ESM output

> Rspack supports bundling ESM format output. By default, Rspack generates CommonJS-like output, but you can configure `output.module` to generate ESM format output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rspack supports bundling with ESM format output. By default, Rspack generates bundled output that includes Rspack runtime code rather than standard CommonJS or ESM format. You can configure [output.module](/config/output#outputmodule) to generate standard ESM format output.
```

Author: even if we use `outputModule`, the Rspack runtime will still be present. therefore, the Rspack runtime is not exclusive to CJS/ESM. what if we write "jsonp" directly?

   12. Affects Node.js related configuration defaults: In Node.js environment, when `output.module` is `true`, `__filename` and `__dirname` default to `'node-module'`
2. [output.chunkFormat](/config/output#outputchunkformat): Set to `'module'` to use ESM format.
3. [output.library.type](/config/output#outputlibrarytype): Set to `'modern-module'` for additional optimization of library ESM output format.
4. [output.chunkLoading](/config/output#outputchunkloading): Set to `'import'` to use ESM `import` for loading chunks.
5. [output.workerChunkLoading](/config/output#outputworkerchunkloading): Set to `'import'` to use ESM `import` for loading workers.
6. [optimization.concatenateModules](/config/optimization#optimizationconcatenatemodules): modern-module depends on this option being enabled to ensure the output supports good tree-shaking and correct library exports.
7. [optimization.avoidEntryIife](/config/optimization#optimizationavoidentryiife): In some cases, Rspack wraps ESM output in an IIFE, which breaks ESM's modular characteristics.
8. [experiments.outputModule](/config/experiments#experimentsoutputmodule): Enable the experimental feature required for output.module.

> 9. [HtmlWebpackPlugin.scriptLoading](/guide/tech/html#htmlwebpackplugin): Set to `'module'` to use ESM `<script type="module">` for loading `.mjs` modules.

Reviewer: I suggest moving this section to after "Building library ESM output" because it is more detailed and not very user-friendly.

Reviewer: LGTM 👍

Reviewer: My suggestion is to move the detailed config documentation to a later section. I'm open to either approach - keeping app config and lib config together or separating them into separate sections.

  optimization: {
    concatenateModules: true,
    avoidEntryIife: true,
    minimize: false,
  },
  experiments: {
    outputModule: true,
  },
};
```

You can check out this [rspack-examples](https://github.com/rspack-contrib/rstack-examples/tree/main/rspack/library-esm) ESM library example.

Building ESM output also requires handling various detailed issues, which are not listed exhaustively here. You can refer to the [ESM format related configurations in Rslib](https://github.com/web-infra-dev/rslib/blob/f727b18805767b99fb85ae67ebff959aa644536e/packages/core/src/config.ts), or use Rslib directly for out-of-the-box library building.

## Future plans for ESM output

Currently, Rspack's support for ESM is still relatively basic, and ESM output cannot fully replace the current CommonJS output. In many scenarios, ESM output cannot work properly. The main limitations include:

1. Lack of static analysis friendly code splitting support
2. Limited custom chunk splitting support in ESM format
3. Lack of module-level side effect information preservation, affecting tree-shaking accuracy
4. Re-exports of external modules (`export * from '...'`) cannot be properly preserved in ESM format

> Rspack will continue to improve ESM support in the future, with the goal of treating ESM output as a first-class citizen, making ESM usage and configuration simpler and more intuitive, and better embracing modern JavaScript module systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are continuously improving Rspack's ESM support to provide a comprehensive solution that addresses existing issues and makes ESM usage more simple and intuitive, better embracing the modern JavaScript module system.
```
